homo no ladies story is changing
our story the story of human
origins and in fact this
discovery is changing how
paleoanthropologist and
scientists think about and
crafts the story of our past all
of you have actually seen this
image before i'm hoping and it
tells a story tells a really
good story and it's a story
about two cavers and some bones
but it's also about how that
discovery led a
paleoanthropologist to place a
very unusual call for excavators
of a particular type and how
this call brought six women
myself one of them together with
a huge team of scientists
volunteers and cavers to
undertake an extraordinary
three-week expedition in South
Africa now the pictures and
perhaps the video give you a
little idea of what it's like
but as one of those people that
had to traverse that route every
day i'll give you a slightly
more personal idea of what that
was like
so that is some of the damage I
am NOT the hairy ankle thank you
but the top three pictures are
of me at various stages during
the expedition but it really was
all worth it
you saw the fantastic results of
our expedition just an
incredible treasure trove of
material that we couldn't
possibly have imagined with
images that really still send
shivers down my back when I see
them I was the first scientist
into the chamber once the
remains had been discovered and
it really was one of those
watershed moments there's a
little narrow hallway that then
opens up into the gentlelady
chamber itself and as I squeeze
through that hallway and looked
into the gentlelady chamber for
me what flashed through my head
that very instant was howard
carter and what it must have
felt like for him to step in
Tutankhamun's tomb for the first
time both of us only had a a
lamp to illuminate what was in
that space and I think for me I
i really felt like all I could
see was what my headlamp showed
me and that was flashes of bone
everywhere I looked and I really
thought while this is what
Carter must have felt like when
he saw flashes of treasure
everywhere he looked it's an
exhilarating feeling and by now
you know that these remains
actually represent one of the
most unusual and incredible
assemblages of material in
history and an entirely new
species Homo already went home
and the lady was announced last
September it trended number two
on the Twitterverse briefly you
surfing the Kardashians which I
understand is quite a feat but
one of the reasons it made such
a splash was the volume of the
material I mean these 1500 and
now seventeen hundred specimens
that we'd recovered was
unprecedented and what people
may be also don't realize is
that all that material those
1500 fragments that we recovered
during that initial expedition
came out of an area 80
centimeters by 80 centimeters by
20 centimeters deep
that's the size of a child
sandbox and for a discipline
making you know is used to
having making a fuss about one
tooth or finding a ja that's
really was quite traumatizing to
the paleo anthropological
community
you see for decades we believed
the story that the human fossils
were as rare as hen's teeth that
it took basically an act of god
or a lottery ticket or being hit
by lightning in order to find
this material but here was a
situation where not only was the
material ridiculously abundant
but had been found by someone
who had been electrocuted once
before so what was going on here
but what a lot of people forget
about getting hit by lightning
twice is that you can increase
your odds tremendously by
getting out there every day with
a lightning rod and what we
proved in finding sediba and
then the lady is that experience
persistence and knowledge really
can pay off big-time
but if you don't look you
certainly won't find then we
actually started looking at the
bones and within those 15
hundred fragments that we were
looking at we had the skulls and
the bodies of at least 15
individuals and we had almost
every bone in the body
represented more than once and
what we found was totally
unexpected a combination of
features that we couldn't
possibly have imagined and
couldn't have predicted in
advance what this meant though
was that our understanding of
skeletal shape and species
identification kind of had to be
rethought because that if we
took just a scrap of nobody's
job we would say it was one
thing but if we took a scrap of
its foot we would say it was
something totally different and
then there were parts of nobody
that were unique to it so it was
really one of those situations
where we had to start thinking
about those stories again and
trying to figure out what these
features actually were telling
us it presented a problem for
paleoanthropology though because
it meant that scraps really
aren't a good indication of the
whole anymore and it raises
questions about all those other
little scraps that we've been
making stories about so
definitively for so long so it
really is challenging us to go
back and look at the material we
have with new eyes and maybe
think about how we need to
reconfigure those stories in
addition the ladies mosaic of
features raises questions about
how we view our origins in the
first place
now we don't have a clear date
from the late yet but even
though if nobody is older if its
young either way it suggests
that we don't really understand
that human family tree very well
at all and it reinforces the
fact that you know we we just
need to maybe think about that
story again in a different way
not only is the tree much
bushier maybe then we originally
thought about it but our family
tree may not actually be a bush
at all what we may be looking at
is more like a river delta a
whole bunch of regulates coming
down from a common source some
that trickle-down and dry out
and we never see them again
other regulates come back and
join another rivulet to make a
bigger rivulet that continues on
down and all of them ending up
in a big pool at the bottom and
that big pool is the now over 7
billion humans that we see on
the planet today and this
analogy may stand the test of
time or not we'll have to see
and as it turned out the next
chapter doing the analysis and
description of the material also
needed a bit of a rewrite lead
the team decided to open up the
primary analysis of the fossils
to young scientists early career
scientists and not just a few
almost 40 researchers met in
South Africa to do the analysis
of the material and even in
estimating for a modest 40 hour
work week which we certainly
exceeded this amounted to almost
10,000 hours of research
something that would take a
single researcher almost five
years to match but it did rattle
a few cages because it presented
a new model for research one
that was more inclusive one that
allowed engagement and and
discussion among each other and
it was really exciting and I'm
something in fact that I think
our discipline has been very
sadly neglectful of in the past
and that actually brings us to
the last weigh-in which nobody
may be changing our human story
and that is in how we tell it
how anthropologist and
scientists share that
information with each other and
with the public the scientific
papers that describe the lady
were released in an open-access
journal called a life shortly
thereafter we released all the
shapefile
else for the fossils on a
website called more for source
hosted by Duke University
this meant that the primary
information on the lady and
basically cast of all the
fossils were available to anyone
who wanted them free of charge
our team really felt strongly
that because this material is
not ours to hoard its south
african heritage it's actually
world heritage this material
relates to the origins of all of
us and it was really important
for us to share that with all of
us
it's a human question for me the
open access model is actually
one of the best parts of this
story in the last year
well since sep tember i have
done over four hundred
interviews and almost 60 talks
on miletti and everywhere I've
gone
the response has been the same
excitement interest and a real
desire to learn about human
origins and scientific
exploration but i think one of
the things that I have seen in
that is that people maybe try
kind of feel isolated by
scientific research not because
they are stupid or the sciences
too hard but because perhaps we
as scientists have done a poor
job of telling the stories
people cannot be expected to
know what they haven't learned
and if they feel isolated from
that learning it develops into
mistrust and mistrust Briggs
breeds fear and fear blocks
curiosity
it's really up to us as
scientists and educators to make
our research comprehensible and
accessible to people and help
them engage with what we do in a
really meaningful way science
really is all about adjusting
one's views in light of new
evidence and in many ways by
pushing the dark spaces of south
africa home on ladies discovery
is pulling paleoanthropology
into the light of new ways of
doing and thinking about our
science and as much as I love
the underworld that i work in i
think this research is really
putting unnecessary and very
positive spotlight on human
origins and giving
paleoanthropologist an
opportunity to tell some very
cool new stories i hope that you
will help me share those with
the rest of the world
thank you
yeah